COMP4115 PA1
Assigned: 5 February, 2015
Deadline: 12 February, 2015


PART ZERO

Download and intall mySQL community edition, version 5.6.22, from
http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/

mySQL is a free download, but you'll have to create an oracle account
and answer some questions. It's a little tedious, so allow plenty of time to get it all done.

Read the install instructions carefully as well. You'll find a lot of helpful information directly on the mySQL reference manual: http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.6/en/installing.html

There's a lot of detail in that manual, so here are some key things
you'll need to do. The specific way you accomplish these tasks will
depend on your OS. I can definitely help you with anythning Mac- or
*nix-related, but Windows questions might be best-suited for Piazza.

1. Create mysql-specific user names and groups. Always run mysql with
a username that requires a password.

2. Set your environment variables so your system recognizes mysql as
an executable. Your mySQL installation will be somewhere like
/usr/loca/mysql, and your path variable needs to be able to find
/usr/local/mysql/bin.  

3. If your system doesn't provide them, make sure you have a mysql
group and a mysql user, and make sure they have rwx permissions on the
entire mysql directory.

4. Run mysql_install_db to set up the initial tables. If it throws any
errors, read them carefully and make sure you fix them before
continuing.  

5. Kick off the mysql server, which will be need to be running before
you can actually log into it with mysql client.



PART ONE. 25 points.

This first problem just warms us up with mySQL once you have it
installed. Note that I'm just asking you simple questions, and you
might need to look up the exact commands to make them happen.

1. As part of your mySQL installation, you should have a database
called 'test'. Switch to this database with the 'use' command. What
tables does it have?

2. Now switch to the built-in 'mysql' database. What are the columns
in the 'func' table? List all pertinent info. How many records exist
in the table?  What do you suppose this table is used to store?

3. Create a new database called "us_states". In this database, add a
table called "states". Add 5 columns to the table: state name (a
string), population (an integer), an ID field, and two more of your
own choosing. Of the two your-choice fields, at least one should be an
ENUM. The ID field should be a primary key that auto-increments.

Using the insert command, add 10 states to your table one at a time
(using real or completely made up population data). 
Run queries to:
* List all the columns in your table,
* output the states in descending order of population, and
* some other query of your choice that tells me something interesting about your data.

Copy/paste the result of running these queries as part of your homework submission.


PART TWO. 35 points.

Now we're going to build on that database you created in Part
One. There are 40 more states to add, but it's tedious to do them one
record at a time.

So instead, create a new file called states.txt. Each entry in your
text file should map to the 5 columns you defined for your states
table. Enter all remaining 40 US states (again, you can approximate or
guess at the actual populations and other fields).

Save your .txt file, and load it into your states table with the LOAD DATA command.

Run a query to output your states again, this time in alphabetical
order by state name. 

For this part of the assignment, you should turn in two things via
github (some research might be required to figure out how to do them):
1. The result of running that query, saved as a .txt file.  
2. Your states database itself. Turn in the appropriate database file,
along with any necessary accompanying files, and zip them into a
tarball. Muktadir and I will unzip the tarball and load your database to evaluate it.


PART THREE. 40 points.

Now we'll use some existing data instead of making our own. For this
part, instead of turning in the result of running some sql commands,
you'll actually save your commands in a .sql file. You (and I) should
be able to execute everything flawlessly my calling mysql and loading
in your file.

I'll be using the same sample data as you to test your programs, so
don't alter any of the database names or schema.

Grab the sampledatabase.zip file that's included in the git repo for
this assignment. Load it into mysql. It contains a database called "classicmodels."

Take some time to familiarize yourself with the
schema and details of classicmodels.

Write several (8-10) SQL queries to illustrate how this database could
be used in practice. You should try to use a wide variety of the SQL
constructs we've discussed in class and in the textbook. You will not
receive full credit if your queries and modifications are all
extremely simple and/or boring.

For this part, your submission should include a .sql file with all of
your queries as well as a readme describing what your various queries demonstrate about the data.